a leading Rights group has accused
Israel of using starvation as a weapon
of war in Gaza Human Rights Watch says
Israel's deliberately denying
Palestinian civilians access to food and
water and that's a war crime under
international law the group says public
statements by high ranking Israeli
officials such as defense minister yov
Galant and national security minister
idar benav on blocking food water and
fuel are being carried out as policy by
Israeli forces and reflects an intention
to starve Civ
civilians the UN says around more than 2
million Palestinians that's nearly the
entire population of Gaza don't have
enough food the UN says around half of
all Palestinians in Gaza are starving
hunger is so widespread that nine out of
10 people are not eating enough or at
all every day in the South where most of
the people have been forced to seek
shelter more than half the internally
displaced families have experienced
severe levels of hunger starvation of
civilians as a method of war is
prohibited under the Geneva
conventions families in Gaza are facing
a dire humanitarian crisis and their
desperation is growing by the day our
correspondent ish aul has more from Gaza
City we're in front of alifa complex
which hosts the biggest number of
displaced people everyone is asking how
can families manage their livelihood
while Under Siege and heavy
bombing
I'm cooking rice to sell to the hungry
we need food and water we want to live
without rice the people would starve to
death we need to work we only have
firewood for
cooking we only have rice to eat and we
have to pay so much more than before we
need to feed our children we can't even
find flour instead of paying less than a
dollar for some flow we now have to pay
about $8 that's if we're lucky enough to
find
the situation is very bad we have
children and grandchildren everyone
needs to eat there's nothing available
except rice and pasta we can't have
bread because we can't find flour if you
find flower every other day it will
never be enough God is my witness
children here always cry because they're
always hungry currently this situation
is the worse compared to other Wars I've
seen Wars since since 1967 and this time
it's the
worst everyone is trying to get some
rice to feed their children rice is now
the only food available for more than
60,000 displaced
people we lost everything we can't find
food even for the children I have six
children this is the situation here in
front of alifa complex people are trying
to fire rides for their families and
some other people inside the complex
can't even do the
same Omar Shakir is Israel and Palestine
director at Human Rights Watch he's
joining me from Aman in Jordan thank you
very much indeed for being with us we
heard stories there of people who have
only got rice uh to eat that they are
unable to get things like flour access
to water is limited but I want to ask
you what evidence there is that it is a
deliberate policy by Israel to to
restrict these
facilities look I think there are about
five pieces of very damning evidence
that led to this conclusion one is two
plus months of uh blocking entry of of
food and water second is the blocking of
all but a trickle of humanitarian aid
from entering into Gaza um these have
been documented for for more than two
months but then you add to it some of
the additional evidence that we looked
at one is the apparent raising of AG
agricultural lands large percentages of
the Agricultural green land in Gaza
turned brown and desolate um fourth the
report looks at the intentional
destruction of objects necessary for
survival so I'm talking about wheat
Mills I'm talking about hospitals uh
water and sanitation facilities um
granaries these kinds of things that you
need to survive and then you put
together the last piece which is
statements by Israeli officials spelling
out in clear terms that their strategy
or policy is to starve civilians as a
tool of Leverage to achieve political
outcomes whether it be release of
hostages the destruction of Hamas
putting it all together you reach the
clear conclusion that the Israeli
government is using starvation as a
weapon of War which is an abhorent War
crime so uh what do you uh require to be
done with the report that you've pulled
together I mean this is adding to the
mountain of of evidence that Israeli
forces are committing Graves grave
violations of the laws of war um Human
Rights Watch has documented Collective
punishment as well of the civilian
population which is a war crime
deliberately blocking the entry of
humanitarian Aid now starvation as a
weapon of War we've documented
apparently unlawful air strikes um
there's also of course the risk of
forceable displacement with 1.9 million
people in Gazo have been displaced from
their homes and I think ultimately
there's a need for um action and
accountability by the International
Community there's a critical vote today
at the UN Security Council for
protecting civilians and Gaza this
report should add to the impetus for
States including the United States not
to block and to support that initiative
it's critical that the prosecutor at the
international criminal court U move
forward with the formal probe into
serious crimes committed in or from
Palestine it's critical that all states
evaluate all forms of complicity in
these grave abuses including um imposing
an embargo on uh the sale of arms to the
Israeli government given the real risk
they'll be used for serious abuses we've
been reporting in the last hour that the
kamam Shalom uh kamam Abu Shalom
Crossing uh the Israeli controlled
Crossing into Gaza has been reopened and
has been allowing some vehicles in we
have seen Aid Vehicles being allowed
through the Rafa Crossing it is obvious
that that's not nearly enough but what
would it take how much would it take to
get food back and water back into uh
Gaza that the people
need I mean you need not just a
significant increase because remember
the issue is also distribution and some
of the restrictions including around
fuel as well as the ongoing
inaccessibility parts of Gaza I mean
northern Gaza is the is the worst hit I
mean there you have nine of 10 people
according to the world food program that
that have gone a full day and night
without food that's compared to 2third
in all of Gaza but it's even more Stark
I mean they're not receiving aid outside
of parts of Southern Gaza so it's not
just about increasing the quantity
obviously it's about ensuring that
there's enough sufficient security there
is no safe place in Gaza today um so you
need them to be able to reach all parts
of Gaza and ultimately the aid itself is
not going to matter if you continue to
have hundreds of bodies of civilians of
children piling up by the day so there
needs to be an end to unlawful attacks
and there needs to be a restoration of
basic Services we've had a blackout in
Gaza um as a result of destruction of
infrastructure um we continue to be
without electricity relying on fuel and
generators this is not sustainable this
is a death sentence for people it needs
to
end Shak we appreciate you being with us
thank you very much
indeed thank you